---
layout: post
title: "RStudio"
excerpt: "Simple statistical tool for business"
categories: articles
tags: [R, statistics]
comments: true
share: true
---

#What is RStudio and why should you install it right now

RStudio is the best integrated development environment - IDE - for R programming language. As this blog aims at converting non-believers and non-technical personnel to this awesome tool, very wide range of R’s strengths is mentioned here. If you’re looking for in-depth analysis, please feel free to explore other articles.

So what is R? It’s this very cool and versatile programming language that statisticians and academics use to perform statistical analysis. But thanks to a large and very enthusiastic community of developers (people who good with computers). Now, you will easily find doctors; scientists; engineers; market researchers; social workers; city planners; customer service departments; etc use this kind of tool, in figuring out whether full-moon nights have more crimes; how old is too old for pink or cat videos cause cancer(s). 

==== code insert here ===

The best thing about R is its short learning curve. The syntax is simple, straightforward and almost all of the complicated stuffs have been packaged nicely by the ever-giving R developers’ community. So, you could go to rstudio.com right now download the absolutely forever free desktop version and perform complicated math operations; which you have forgotten since high school; with a few lines of codes. Don’t get me wrong, it’s no cakewalk. But after a year on the job using R, you will find it becomes second nature.

==== code insert here ====

While RStudio is just a nice little application that allow you to work with a user-friendly interface instead of the cold dark terminal, those computer geeks so proudly embrace in their dark basements.

You might think to yourself right now, that you don’t do any statistical analysis at your work. Plus, if you have to do a report with lots of number, an Excel or Open-office table would do the job. And you will be right. Excel is still a very powerful tool for you daily office job. If you need something done quick and dirty on small amount of data, spreadsheet is still the hammer for that nail. 

However, say if you need to maintain a large amount of data and those spreadsheet formulas become alien cryptic hieroglyphs overtime. And those references mazes spin your head to what this number meant? R will be your long-term friend.

Since everything you done to the data is written in your R script file. Where you could comment on what you’d done to what outcome you expected, all on the same scroll. You could share the script to any of your colleagues, and they will take less time to pick up where you left off. But Excel has better charts? In the past, yes. But look what R could do now:

====== htmlwidgets ======

Beat any google fusion table huh?

R also has much more computational muscle than excel. You won’t notice this if all you do is a few sum or average functions in between at your job. But if you have to find linear regression model of two variables, for example, Excel will likely fails to produce accurate depiction of the relationship. This is especially true if your model involve very large or very small number with many decimal points. However, even with only sum and average R allow you to save on a formula free Excel, with all your calculations stored safely away. 
Finally there are so many ways R and Excel can work together, this is not even a contest. Make a spot for R on your tool belt, right next to Excel. They will work very closely and brilliantly together.

Want to know more, keep scrolling

Once you install RStudio, you need to start learning R packages. Remember those? These are goodies provided free of charge by our friends in the R developers’ community. They are codes that does certain job, which is often very well documented somewhere on the internet. To install a package, simply type into your RStudio console:

==== code insert ====

There are packages for almost anything you could think of that have to do with handling data. There are packages for you to build your own package like: devtools; testthat and roxygen2.

For an everyday run of the mill cubicle workstation. I recommend a few useful packages as follow:
RMySQL: allow you to send SQL queries to your company’s database and retrieve data in tabular form, which you could save in csv files for further analysis. This package need to go along with the RODBC package, so you could connect to your database using ODBC drivers.

=== insert code ===

XLConnect: allow to work with Excel in RStudio. You could get data from Excel, easily do complicated analytical or just simple reshaping on your data then write the result back onto Excel for your regular tabular reports.

=== insert code ===

foreign: allow you to work with SPASS; SAS; Stata; Systat; Minitab; S and Weka dataset. This thing is so useful, I have not the opportunities to fully utilize its potential. 

=== insert code ===

ggplot2: this is what make R so universal, the ability to demonstrate your findings in multitudes of charts and graphs. The syntax is super simple to use and the result, well see for yourself:

=== insert code ===

htmlwidgets: this is what would make R become popular in offices and conference rooms worldwide. The ability to turn your reports into interactive (JavaScript based) visualization with R. This doesn’t require a lot of programming skill, but let you build interactive website which have your work beautifully displayed.

=== insert code ===

There are many more packages that let you do exotic things with your datasets. But these 5 will start you off nicely and might even convince you to start coding, a huge boost to anyone career in this digital age. If you work in large team, there is RStudio Server. Which is located in the cloud, like anything else these days. This allow you to use R anywhere even without your machine. Sharing work and scaling up or down your operation can also be done easily and cost effectively with the cloud based server. But it requires periodic payments. So make sure you and your team are well versed in R first before moving up there.

RStudio let you streamline your work and manage your organization knowledge much more efficiently. Its support community is huge and ever-growing. Its syntax is simple enough for non-developers to pick up in relative short time compare to other programming languages. Additionally, its current graphical packages could let you build interactive app visualizing your findings at the standard used to be provided by expensive SaaS firms. As cherry on top, R will also expose you to new opportunities, to do far deeper analysis on your data than Excel could ever could. Did I also mentioned that it’s provided free at RStudio.com? 
